Chapter 2: Tools and technologies for integrated, fair, and sustainable ecosystems of production
Introduction 
We are witnessing the surface of a broad array of digital tools and practices that are relevant to representing the value of social and economic interactions. Various social groups have started to organize their efforts to harness the opportunities of shared technological infrastructures, investing their own vision and ambitions in their development.
In this chapter, we provide a brief overview of the main enabling technologies and some exemplary tools that are investing in this potential. Our focus is mainly directed towards different complementary solutions that allow for the representation of social and environmental externalities. Such externalities, both positive and negative, are largely invisible from the current accounting media, which recognize almost exclusively price-mediated transactions. By contrast, we now have increasing technological and social capacities to account for a more pluralistic, socially and environmentally embedded, economic reality.
Our mapping is structured in three layers:
    • A mutual integration layer, where distributed ledgers and shared supply chains1 are used to facilitate information and knowledge flows in productive communities in order to enable and guide contributions. By generalizing information on the current state of affairs and the agents across an 	ecosystem, the form of stigmergic coordination that determines CBPP in immaterial goods can shift to physical production. 
    • A layer of circulation and exchange mechanisms that procure and allocate the required human cooperation, as well as material and energy resources. The use of alternative signals (whether monetary or not) can coordinate and monitor the input and output relations by embedding socially and environmentally desired outcomes. 
    • A layer of planning frameworks for global thresholds and allocations allow the management of matter and energy flows and ensure the biocapacity accountability of the actors in these networks. The planning framework can also be used to direct resources to societal priorities (Kate Raworth’s Doughnut Economics are a good framework for looking at the interaction of these two facets).
The rest of this chapter describes tools for mutual integration, followed by tools for circulation and exchange. The specific accounting and planning frameworks will be discussed in chapter 3.
The distinction with regards to the three layers above or the different functions of the tools is not always straightforward. There is in fact a broad area of overlap and complementarities among different tools and their underlying technologies, as well as the principles and objectives underpinning their design. Moreover, our description concerns largely the conceptual intentions of the various tools and is not constrained by any given technological feasibility at the present time. Simply put, our main intention is to illustrate what is simultaneously possible and desirable in the way we guide the design of the technologies that would largely define the collective institutions of future societies.
The relevant data stem from the various descriptions of the projects through their own and popular media, but also the internal legal and operational documentation, where available. Therefore, the description represents the vision of a project that instigators themselves want to communicate about their project, interpreted with a critical outlook by the authors. Nevertheless, the aim is to illustrate the popular view for its own sake and identify trends and patterns of interpretation, rather than to represent an empirical set of evidence for a number of technological solutions.
What we are specifically doing in the next two chapters is asking ourselves the question: How can we tweak and transform the current wave of blockchain-based distributed ledger technology, with its libertarian, anarcho-capitalism and ‘Austrian economics’-based premises, so that we can arrive at ledger technologies which are more compatible with a socially just, ecologically sustainable manufacturing and production system?
    • We can imagine for example, a ledger design that is not centralized, without oligarchic validation: this is what Holochain brings to the table.
    • We can imagine a set of protocols that let us build commons-centric economic subsystems, as ECSA would allow us to do.
    • We could imagine replacing the competitive games of game theory, which are now governing the incentive schemes of blockchain projects, with ‘cooperative games’ as R-Chain proposes to do.
    • We could imagine replacing Smart Contracts, based on individual agreements, with Ostrom Contracts, allowing more collective, commons-based agreements (Sustans).
    • We can imagine replacing currencies that are based on speculative supply and demand (commodity currencies), with currencies that are linked to human contributions, based on a web of trust (Trustlines), or that give us direct information about the ecological state of a resource (asset-backed currencies such as Fishcoin, Mangrove Coin, SolarCoin).

Tools for Mutual Integration 
This section is dedicated to the basic tools that create a common environment for actors in a production and value ecosystem, to work together and align their actions towards one another.
Technical readers will find details in the main descriptions of the selected tools, while their strategic significance is highlighted in an introductory paragraph in bold type.
Below, we present the following projects involved in such endeavours:
    • The Economic Space Agency (ECSA), which is developing an environment for interconnected economic spaces and commons-based Distributed Programmable Organizations
    • Holochain, a distributed ledger which is not a blockchain, and whose organization is based on biomimicry, centered around people (agents) and their actions, allowing anyone to interoperate contextual ledgers
    • DaoStack, which is building tools so that productive communities can work with each other, using tools for collective governance
In describing these tools, we make no claim as to their full technological maturity and workability at this stage, but the projects were all selected because they have effectively started the production of their coding and infrastructures.
Economic Space Agency (ECSA): An environment for interconnected economic spaces and commons-based Distributed Programmable Organizations
ECSA extends the notion of a Distributed Autonomous Organization to that of a commons-based ‘Distributed Programmable Organization (cDPO). It wants to create the tools to move from the cooperative production of immaterial software, that is, extend the open-source paradigm to commons-based ‘open-source economic spaces.’
The Economic Space Agency (ECSA) is a research and development organization dedicated to open-source solutions that can enable new economic forms. Its current flagship mission envisions the creation of a techno-economic stack that would allow the initiation, finance and operation of entities, along with the conditions for their cooperation and interaction. The vision is centered around a platform that builds on distributed ledger technology to support an ecosystem of autonomous projects and initiatives. These initiatives could entail any sort of activities, from collaborative projects to start-up companies and social enterprises, with for-profit or non-profit orientation, even political parties and think tanks. ECSA calls these ‘open-source economic spaces’ and considers them to be an extension of the open-source economy. In essence, ECSA aims to deploy smart contracts and agreements to create a set of coherent templates, from which these entities can choose. It envisions an extension of the notion of Distributed Autonomous Organizations to commons-based “Distributed Programmable Organizations,”2 thus re-embedding the agency of “autonomous” organizations to the actual people involved.
The ECSA stack comprises two interrelated systems, “Gravity” and “Space,” supported by a consulting service named “Accelerator.” Gravity is a distributed infrastructure that provides a protocol for the creation of cryptographically-secured applications. Gravity is described as a World Computing Fabric, which is modular architecture for building resilient, verifiable networks of virtual machines (ECSA, 2018). The World Computing Fabric connotes the ECSA critique to the World Computer model that is characteristic of Ethereum, due to its redundancies and limitations for decentralised applications. In contrast, Gravity offers more resilience and flexibility in networks of decentralised computers. 
Space is a modular software development tool that facilitates the creation of (semi-)autonomous programs called “economic spaces.”3 It aspires to replicate human sociality and enable embedded forms of collective finance. Finally, the Accelerator offers a broad range of support services, ranging from the design, creation and implementation of economic spaces, to research, organization, education and market operation.
The economic spaces generate the necessary resources for new economic entities of the ECSA ecosystem by issuing equity-based tokens. The tokens are customized to the intrinsic values and motivations of the community involved, and their issuance embeds the organizational and operational arrangements desired at a given time. The equity of tokens may represent various forms of contributions for diverse groups of stakeholders, including funds, skills, collaboration or know-how.4 
The ECSA ecosystem and technological tools provide an alternative vision of finance, by enabling diverse forms of investments or contributions that are committed to the actual production of the initiatives involved. Especially for the commons-oriented initiatives, access to finance is usually restrained and the rules are not aligned with the internal principles of the communities. Simultaneously, the blockchain scenery has so far been dominated by speculative incentives.
ICO investors are not so much interested in whatever is produced by new ventures, but are mainly speculating on a potential rise in the price of crypto-tokens, in order to sell them for quick profit. ECSA makes an important step to counter this tendency, by connecting the value of tokens with the productive relations and the internal ethics of the communities issuing them. Moreover, they can acknowledge different forms of contributions and generate an immutable record of them to guide the economic interaction in the ecosystem.

Holochain: An alternative to a global distributed ledger, based on biomimicry
The main reason why bitcoin and its blockchain are inefficient in terms of energy consumption is that every new transaction has to be validated by the whole network, leading to an exponential increase in the number of resources needed to maintain the system. Holochain does this significantly different. It is technically not a blockchain, but simply a way for separate ledgers to cooperate and become interoperable with each other. Hence, Holochain is infinitely scalable at marginal cost. 
Holochain stands for “holographic storage for distributed applications.” As the name implies, it is a framework for the development and hosting of distributed applications. Holochain can be described as an alternative to a distributed ledger comprising a significantly “lighter” architecture. Instead of storing a copy of the whole ledger on every node of the network and enforcing its validation, Holochain takes an agent-centric approach and splits the data to many different nodes and ensures access only to the data that are useful or relevant for every node. This means that every agent generates and holds on to their own data on their own device. The only types of data that are transferred to – and are readable by – other agents are the ones to which they need access or are authored in a "shared space." In Holochain there is no global view on all data, unless specifically and consciously designed to be.
Subsequently, data integrity in Holochain is ensured through a P2P validation system. It doesn’t entail resource-intensive processes like “mining,” which allows Holochain to be easier to deploy on less powerful devices, such as mobile phones. Holochain rather relies on its peers to ensure the integrity of the data shared among them. The peers of the network hold part of the data and validate it against a set of shared validation rules, which are specific to the protocol or an application (hApp). In other words, users audit each other's actions to see whether they have been authored in accordance with their common validation rules.
The validation rules may vary among different applications, as some may require stricter rules than others. For instance, a cryptocurrency can have different validation rules from those of a social network. Hence users in the Holochain system do not interact directly with the data shared among the peers of the network. All interaction is rather effectuated through the code of applications, so that they enforce their own rules, restrictions and objectives. The very concept of an application in Holochain begins to break down. Thanks to the level of composability of functionality and because of the loose UI coupling, the ecosystem rather evolves as a collection of micro services arranged in intricate relationships with each other tailored for the user.
Much like Ethereum, Holochain was developed to support the functionality of applications, based on sets of agreements among the people that use them, from social media and messaging applications to shared logistics management and cryptocurrencies. In the old client-server model, the existence of a central node served to maintain the integrity of the data and ensure the enforcement of the agreed-upon rules. With distributed ledger systems, this central node is replaced with a network of nodes synchronizing to a common state. Holochain enables this function without the need of a central node, to which everyone is accountable and should report. It does so by requiring each node to agree to the shared set of rules, cryptographically verify it with a hash function as the initial entry in their own record, and require every subsequent action to be validated against the same set of rules. 
Simultaneously, it solves some of the main scalability issues associated with blockchain technology. Holochain does not require every node to update a unique database held by everyone on every interaction in the network. Instead, nodes validate each other based on the information that is mutually relevant and on rules that are context-specific. This way, the system becomes more efficient with the addition of new nodes, which allows for network effects to be harnessed. 
Ultimately, the type of interaction enabled by Holochain will be determined by the applications that will eventually run on top of it. However, we do not suggest that Holochain, as, in fact, every technological infrastructure, is neutral. Bitcoin, and to a large extent most blockchain-based infrastructures, was imbued with the principles that were of importance to their designers: anonymity, immutability and the by-passing of human trust. Conversely, the design of Holochain has several characteristics that are relevant to the commons. This can form the basis of a new economic reality that is more democratic, more inclusive, more open and better informed on the local and global environmental thresholds. 
More specifically, Holochain creates the conditions that may allow diverse economic entities to mutualize and share resources more freely and agree on common rules of conduct that can be enforced in a P2P fashion. This can accommodate a more even distribution of power among the participating agents and increase transparency. Holochain alone is not a protocol for social cooperation, but it can support the creation and enforcement of such shared protocols. Combined with the possibility to issue and distribute crypto-tokens, communities may create fairer reward systems and new media to interface with the market, while maintaining their integrity to their values and principles. Furthermore, Holochain goes beyond crypto-tokens, by enabling and favoring forms of mutual credit crypto-accounting, which have a much greater expressive capacity than tokens. Finally, the Holochain framework can produce massive efficiency gains by unlocking unused processing and storage capacities, as well as shared information, to allow for more sustainable use of vital computation resources and increased trust among collaborating agents. 
DAOstack: Integrated mechanisms for large-scale governance
DAOstack is a decentralized platform that aims to facilitate self-organization of productive communities by providing tools for collective self-governance. 
DAOstack, as the name already implies, provides a stack of technological tools for the development of DAOs, comprising: a) a framework for the deployment of smart contracts on the Ethereum blockchain (Arc); b) a front-end developer environment for the development of decentralized applications (Arc.js); and c) a user interface enabling the funding and resource allocation of decentralized organizations (Alchemy). The latter has been designed so as to allow people without advanced technical knowledge to interact with the other layers of the DAOstack, launch DAOs, issue crypto-tokens and invite others to participate and support their ideas. 
The main motivation of DAOstack is to provide a technological infrastructure to different decentralized organizations, one that would create a collaborative environment, accessible to a critical mass of people, to launch and participate in. It is often characterized by its instigators as a “Wordpress for DAOs.”5 In the same way as Wordpress enabled people with no preexisting programming skills to manage the content of websites, DAOstack envisions to facilitate the generation of DAOs that define the rules for decentralized organizations. 
Moreover, the DAOstack instigators aspire to effectuate a fine balance between scalability, i.e., the number of decisions a collective can make in a period of time, and resilience, i.e., the incorruptibility of those decisions. For this purpose, a collective decision-making process has been developed, called Holographic Consensus. This process relies on small groups of people making decisions on behalf of the larger majority, but in a way that guarantees perfect alignment between the two groups. Holographic Consensus allows faster and locally-situated decisions in a large-scale DAO, by aligning local decisions with the global opinion via a crypto economic game. Essentially, a possible mismatch between the two is presented as an economic opportunity, which predictors can exploit for economic gains, whilst supporting the upscaling of the DAO governance. 
Instead of building a specific protocol to support different projects, DAOstack provides access to different layers for different sets of skills, so that diverse teams may develop their own protocols, based on their own values and principles. The coordination of these teams and their interaction with the rest of the DAOstack ecosystem is guided by the issuance and distribution of crypto-tokens — these function like price signals, i.e., as incentives for investments (of effort and energy); the difference is that there are different values co-encoded beyond simple supply and demand. Contributors of value to the network are rewarded with tokens, which in turn gain their value from the usability of the application offered. Subsequently, tokens may also be circulated among different decentralized organizations in the ecosystem to support or benefit from each other's services. 
Moreover, DAOstack is itself a DAO that issues its native token (GEN). This serve to facilitate and incentivize collective decision-making on the development of the DAOstack ecosystem and the support of new projects on top of and along with it. An attention and reward system guides this interaction, and it is reflected in the distribution of GEN tokens and reputation, which is also reflected in voting power.6 
The model of DAOstack operates on top of the Ethereum blockchain and it is thus arguably constrained by the limitations related with it. Moreover, the model of Holographic Consensus shares many of the assumptions of free-market economics, where individuals share a common “rationality” to exploit opportunities for economic gains and efficiently align global supply and demand. But governance is arguably more than a mere balancing of attention and decision-making needs. It requires collective, ethically-binding, and value-sensitive mechanisms that markets' signaling alone cannot achieve. 
However, it offers a new perspective on the issuance and distribution of crypto-tokens, which is oriented towards the support of collective, ecosystemic efforts. Like ECSA, it ties the value of tokens to the actual production of useful products and services from network-based collaboration, allowing the peers to decide upon and enforce their own rules of coordination and reward systems. More importantly, it offers an interface that opens up these possibilities to a greater number of people who do not necessarily have programming skills, along with a native system to facilitate the launching and support of new initiatives. 
Tools for Circulation and Exchange 
This section focuses on tools for implementing the exchange and distribution of ‘value.’
We discuss the following projects:
    • FairCoin and FairCoop, an ecosystem for open cooperative ecosystems of exchange of fair value
    • Envienta, which is developing a system for globally-integrated sustainable and open-source manufacturing
    • FabChain is a project of the Fab Lab ecosystem, aiming to link specific Fab Labs, to real-life manufacturing systems, for which they function as collective R&D resources, in cooperation with cities
    • Terra0, though in the early experimental stage, is based on the radical concept of giving agency to natural resources, by considering them as "DAO’s"

FairCoin and FairCoop: Tools for a cosmo-local, open cooperative ecosystem
FairCoin, FairCoop and the larger ecosystem of which it is a part of, aims to be an open cooperative ecosystem for the exchange of value between communities both locally and on a global scale. It is driven by the ideas of an ‘integral revolution’ championed by the Catalan Integral Cooperative7 and is already being used by various local communities mainly in Spain and Greece. It is much more than simply a new and more ‘fair’ currency, within an ecosystem that is democratically governed. Rather, it aims to offer a total solution for post-capitalist practices.
FairCoin is a currency created by FairCoop, the global open cooperative ecosystem. The motivation behind FairCoin has been the creation of a medium of value for the FairCoop economic system that would be controlled by its global community. FairCoin was initiated by an anonymous developer who distributed the first 50 million units for free to people that had expressed their interest, but the currency was then grandfathered by the FairCoop system as a means of payment. 
In line with the FairCoop values, FairCoin is premised on the principle that value is generated by cooperation, in contrast to the broadly applied methods of minting or mining that generate and escalate inequalities in the user community. The first version of FairCoin experimented with a hybrid consensus protocol between proof-of-work and proof-of-stake, aiming for a more ecologically friendly model; some additional units were generated as well. However, it was soon realized that a completely different approach had to be developed. 
This led to the second version of FairCoin, which implemented a unique consensus algorithm called proof-of-cooperation. This protocol is not meant to create any additional units, rather it relies on a network of trusted Cooperatively Validated Nodes (CVN) to validate transactions and generate blocks. CNV operators are appointed and approved by the FairCoop general assembly. A new block is created every three minutes and the process is coordinated among the CVNs by a round-robin system. A small transaction fee is charged on the users by the CVN that generates a block at any given time, which mainly serves to avoid spam activity and also covers the operational costs of the system. 
The design of the FairCoin system allows it to run efficiently with very low requirements in processing and energy use. FairCoop claims that a network of up to 30 computers with regular processing capacity suffices to cover its operation, requiring the equivalent of a 4-member household in annual energy consumption.8 Furthermore, FairCoin is substantially less prone to speculation, thereby tying its value to real productive activity that takes place in the global FairCoop economic system. Its exchange rate is regulated through democratic procedures by the FairCoop general assembly, rather than free-market operations. Only a small fraction of FairCoins are held by people not directly involved in FairCoop, while the majority of the units are circulated within a community of people sharing its common values. 
FairCoin is a very specific case of a currency that has been created to serve a specific purpose by a specific community. Nevertheless, its relevance arguably stretches beyond the FairCoop ecosystem, being a medium of value explicitly designed to embed rules for social and ecological sustainability. Furthermore, the fact that it is based on the original bitcoin client eloquently exemplifies the potential of blockchain technology in enabling different socio-institutional outcomes, despite its original underpinnings. Regardless of its limited scope, it showcases how small-group dynamics of high-trust communities can be scaled on a global level, facilitated by a technological infrastructure that embodies their shared values and aspirations. 
Trustlines: Mutual credit for common good 
Most cryptocurrencies are speculative ‘commodity’ currencies, whose value depends on supply and demand but which have no direct relation to sustainable material realities, in other words, the price signals do not give sufficient information about the sustainable use of the represented resources. Two alternatives for currencies are, on the one hand, asset-backed currencies which give information about the stocks and flows of a resource, so that it reflects sustainable use (Fishcoin, Mangrove Coin, SolarCoin). The other are mutual-credit currencies which in our opinion can reflect human contributions to common projects. Trustlines brings such a mutual credit function within the distributed ledger environment.

Trustlines9 is an Ethereum-based platform that allows the issuance of IOUs on a P2P basis. Its design is inspired by the original idea of the decentralized currency network “Ripple” (Fugger, 2004). Trustlines Network essentially enables users to create money by providing credit for an amount they deem fair for people they trust. A Trustline is a smart contract that represents an agreement between two people to connect with a bilateral line of credit. These lines can be translated into purchasing power among the trusted nodes of the network. 
The Trustlines Network has no single native token. Money in the network can be denominated in fiat currencies, commodities, crypto-tokens or other units of account, based on rules agreed upon all the nodes participating in a certain network of trustlines denominated in the same form of currency. For instance, a credit line has been agreed between user A and user B. This credit can be directly translated into valid money for either user in their direct trustees. But, simultaneously, user A may also make a purchase from user C, provided that there is trust between users B and C. This relation may be further expanded as more users participate in the network and create trustlines between them. As long as a line of trust can be established, valid transactions can occur in the network. 
The Trustlines Network is functionally not very different from our current credit-based monetary system. Money is a form of credit that becomes valid for anyone who trusts the creditor, which is usually a trusted third party, such as a central or commercial bank. In this sense, Trustlines leverages P2P trust relations to allow potentially anyone to become a creditor, within given limits. Moreover, the credit system becomes more efficient10 as it scales, by depending on well-connected users. A small fee is charged on every transaction and is paid to the users providing trusted connections in transactions, thus providing incentives for users to establish as many connections as possible. 
An important aspect of Trustlines is that the users can determine the level of credit they provide to others, according to how they feel comfortable. An agreed upon balance tracks how much the users owe to each other and the users’ spending power is limited by this balance. Subsequently, the network of all trustlines is managed through smart contracts, and functions as a notary for all credit lines and balances. In case a user is unable to pay back their debt, the dispute is privately settled between the involved parties. 
Trustlines, as a monetary solution, admittedly presents many of the deficiencies of our current credit-based monetary and accounting system. Moreover, to the extent that credits are denominated in fiat currency, it remains limited by the power dynamics of the current financial institutions. Nevertheless, it still presents an interesting application of blockchain technology to enable mutual credit in a P2P fashion, based on smart contracts enforcing socially determined criteria. This way, even though the actual trust relations among people become abstracted as the network scales, it is still possible to enforce and extend their agreed upon rules and values to their respective network. Additionally, the possibility to use different types of monies as denominators may provide greater degree of flexibility and resilience in the system, while it also allows the use of cryptocurrencies that reflect the values of the respective network. 
Circles: A decentralized basic income
Circles is a cooperative project developing a P2P basic income using the Ethereum blockchain. It aims to explore money as a commons where communities can govern how the currency functions. A “bottom-up” basic income, Circles promotes cooperation and economic interaction by encouraging local trade networks. The more connected community members are to each other, the more valuable their network becomes. 

Circles is a P2P, social currency wherein individuals can exchange one-to-one once they trust each other in the system. These relationships form a web of trust, which helps protect the system from Sybil attacks or people trying to claim more than one basic income. Similar to Trustlines, the Circles currency can be exchanged via transitive trust, wherein individuals can exchange with anyone in each other’s trusted networks. Circles recipients can also validate their currency with an intermediary in order to extend their trust network. 

The system mints an equal number of Circles coins to all participants, like a universal basic income. It is a demurrage currency, with a decay rate on all issued coins, creating a hoarding resistant and post-accumulation economy. The monetary policy of Circles is determined by a community governance process, undertaken at each regional Circles hub. Community members collectively agree on parameters of the system like issuance rate, demurrage rate, and trust limits. Because human trust is a core component of the Circles system, the community governance process will not and is not intended to scale beyond a regional level. That said, once multiple regional Circles hubs are established, there will likely be opportunities for them to trade and connect.

Circles runs via a series of smart contracts on the Ethereum blockchain, but it is a blockchain-agnostic protocol – and could easily run on another chain, or as its own protocol. There is a user-facing mobile app for iOS and Android, but Circles tokens can also be viewed on and interacted with on any other ERC20-compatible interface. Finally, for ease of use and low latency, the Circles team maintains a series of off-chain services to host non-critical components of the system, like user profile photos and cached recent transactions. 

The project will be undertaking a research pilot in Berlin in 2019. The aim of the pilot is to test assumptions about the system, including user engagement, and for these purposes they have partnered with a Radical Young Mothers collective, Prinzessinnengarten (a community garden and farmer’s market) and Ola’s Cafe, among other organizations. The team is also bootstrapping their own cafe, Cafe Grundeinkommen, which will accept the currency as well as serving as a community hub for Circles governance. Finally, the app will include a ‘listing’ feature for individuals and organizations to post goods and services they are willing to exchange for Circles, fostering a peer to peer marketplace.
Envienta: An integrated environment for open-source manufacturing
Envienta is establishing an integrated environment for integrated open-source manufacturing.
Envienta is a platform aiming to assist open design and distributed manufacturing. Its vision is to provide a framework to connect innovators, creators and designers with makerspace communities and eventually users, consumers and the existing supply chains. The Envienta framework is composed of: a) a platform, as a unique interface for the management of user accounts and projects; b) an innovation hub, mapping a global network of makerspaces and their respective capabilities; and c) an education system, oriented towards the sharing of knowledge and solutions in an online-facilitated environment. 
Any user in the Envienta ecosystem may initiate a project and find interested parties with which to collaborate. After forming a team and an initial plan they can broadcast it to the network in order to attract investments for the design and prototyping of the idea. The prototypes are then shared under Creative Commons licences, so that others may download the blueprints, examine, modify and improve the products, and share them back with the rest of the network. Finally, once products reach maturity, they can be introduced in the market through a network of manufacturers, while the platform provides assistance with marketing and legal and IP issues, in alignment with the CBPP principles.11 
The interaction in the Envienta ecosystem is also facilitated by the ENV crypto-token, generated by the Ethereum network. The ENV token serves to record and manage the data flows in the ecosystem, by providing access to the produced services, rewards and reputation for contributors, while tracking the value flows among projects and supporting internal crowdsourcing. 
The main goal of the ENV token system is to strengthen cooperation within the network and support its economic model. It allows the agents in the ecosystem to decide the types of contributions and resources that are sought, such as labor, renewable energy, land, tools, and machinery, and distribute rewards in ENV tokens. Simultaneously, the distribution of tokens is also connected with voting rights, while reputation reflects voting power. Furthermore, insofar as they represent the value produced in the network, they may also be circulated outside the network to engage external agents and acquire services. 
Ultimately, the ENV token system envisions to support a resource-based economic model. It is understood as a transition step towards a representation of a diverse set of economic activities, including innovation, manufacturing and contributions, that is tightly connected with the tangible and intangible resources involved. The ENV tokens help to monitor the value streams across different stakeholders and create a real-time record of the available means and resources. 
At its initial stages Envienta is focusing on areas related to sustainable living, home automation, green energy and food production. Its approach is explicitly oriented to foster sustainability and commons-based economic production. It is inspired by the concept of “cosmolocalism”12 (Ramos et al., 2017), which builds on the potential of globally shared knowledge, information and design, in confluence with localized distributed manufacturing, ideally entailing the mutualization of technological tools and manufacturing facilities. Cosmo-localism fosters a shared morality through the commons, in the sense of co-creating and co-managing shared resources. 
FabChain: Linking advanced research to urban metabolisms and mainstream production and manufacturing
FabChain is uniquely positioned to correlate the advances of the pioneering Fab Lab ecosystem, which is focused on 3D printing and relocalized manufacturing, as R&D laboratories connected with both a league of engaged cities as well as manufacturing organizations.
FabChain13 is envisioned as a token-based system to solve the problems of fragmentation and value flows among local distributed, commons-oriented design and manufacturing capacities. It builds upon the vibrant community of Fab Labs, a global network of digital fabrication laboratories with over 1300 members extending to more than 100 countries. Simultaneously, it advances the idea of the Fab Cities, a concept scaling the Fab Lab culture on city level, promoting a model for urban transformation based on the sustainable use of local resources and materials and the sharing of cultures. The specific importance of FabChain is that it aims to connect an existing network of advanced research laboratories, with an alliance of cities and with the existing logistical networks of industry.
The main goal of FabChain is to engage stakeholders in sustainable and (open-source) circular economy production practices, including the recycling, reuse and relocalization of supply chains at a city level, while enabling interaction and synchronization with other cities. This would need a confederated blockchain infrastructure that could facilitate the trans-local allocation of knowledge and productive capacities, while monitoring material flows in local, transparent supply chains. In this process, local makerspaces would be instrumental in mobilizing and allocating material resources and means of production. These relations would be agreed upon and enforced through smart contracts that would secure the automatic execution of the terms with the distribution of tokens. 
The design of FabChain tokens encapsulates various functions for different stakeholders across the supply chain. They can provide certification; ensure transparency and alignment to ethical conditions (e.g., fair trade, provenance, organic production); stimulate cooperation and synergy among different stakeholders; incentivize circular economic activities; distribute rewards to contributors; regulate the use of mutualized resources and facilities; support the network’s sustainability by creating links with the external market economy; encourage participation; and establish reputation-based decision-making. 
The token model of FabChain is intended to offer two different types of tokens: a) a non-transferable reputation token (FabRep); and b) a transferable utility token (FabCoin). The reputation token will represent the value that an agent, either an individual, a group or an organization, has contributed to the network, as perceived within their respective communities. Each community is allowed to determine its own rules to attribute reputation, as it also affects the power relations in its decision-making. 
FabCoins may be transferred among entities in the ecosystem to reward or encourage contributions, promote localized production and incentivize collaboration among different actors. Furthermore, different actors may provide products and services in exchange of either FabCoins or other currency. The value of the tokens will reflect their usability in these relations and their recognition as a mechanism of reciprocity. In principle, FabCoins could be used for the remuneration of contributions in the network, insofar as they provide access to useful services in the global FabChain community or eventually the possibility to be exchanged for fiat currency. 
Additionally, FabChain aims to issue a series of ad-hoc certification tokens to determine the level of skills and competences for individuals or groups; the quality of services, tools and learning, as well as security standards for Fab Labs; the quality of designs and other relevant uses. Finally, FabChain also foresees proper attribution to the designers and their creations. 
The FabChain model makes significant contributions in the development of accountability systems apt for sustainable and inclusive production. It illustrates an employment of distributed ledger technology to simultaneously coordinate social production on a global level, while keeping local material flows in check. This can be crucial especially at the city level, where a critical capacity for circular economic activities is concentrated, due to population density, the existence of diverse skills and capabilities and available materials for reuse. It has been argued before (Bauwens & Niaros, 2018) that cities offer a favorable context for commons transitions. The FabChain confederated infrastructure could be instrumental in supporting the generalization of this potential at the global level by creating trans-local bridges of knowledge-sharing and political organization. 
Terra0: Giving DAO agency to natural resources
Terra0 is aimed to create a capacity for natural resource systems, like forests, to develop their own technological and legal agency, by becoming DAO’s. Several countries, such as Ecuador, Bolivia and New Zealand, have started to give legal personhood status to forests and rivers. But until now, human organizations need to go to court in order to realize this agency on behalf of the natural resource entities. The terra0 project goes a radical step further, by linking the resource entity to sensors, wallets, and making it into a DAO which can initiate actions on its own.

Terra0 is a framework built on Ethereum and aims to provide automated resilience for natural ecosystems. It envisions the creation of DAOs-employing rules that would enable natural ecosystems, including pieces of land or forests, to self-manage the resources they encapsulate. The terra0 goal is to create technologically-augmented ecosystems that can be more resilient, and acquire agency to enforce predetermined rules in economic relations. 
One of the initial scenarios of terra0 envisions a technologically-augmented forest that may calculate and regulate its output in terms of raw materials, and in particular wood, but also other services that it may offer to both human and non-human agents, including quality relaxation for visitors, a protected ecosystem for diverse species and contributions to the overall ecological balance. The terra0 scenario imagines a shift from a situation where third parties exploit the forest’s elements, to a situation where the forest is able to engage in transactions and claim control of the exchange value generated by its assets. 
To this end, a smart contract would be created on the Ethereum blockchain to control the inputs and outputs of the forest by utilizing data from external (e.g., satellite images) or embedded sources (e.g., preconfigured databases, sensors) to determine the number, age and current status of the trees. A first crowdsale event would distribute terra0 tokens to the (human) shareholders of the project, in the form of debenture.14 These tokens are non-transferable and represent a share of the property of the smart contract, whereas the forest is signed over to itself in exchange for debentures. This means that at the initial stage the forest owns itself, but is indebted to its shareholders. 
The forest may then manage the exploitation of its resources through a separate smart contract that issues Woodtokens to grant licenses for the logging of certain trees. The Woodtoken reflects an agreed amount of wood in accordance with predetermined economic and ecologic parameters, such as tree age and density necessary for the preservation of a certain level of tree population or growth rate. 
Using the revenue of these licenses the forest can redeem its terra0 tokens by paying its creditors. Once all the terra0 tokens have been redeemed, the forest is the sole shareholder of its own economic unit. It can then continue to regulate its resources by controlling the issue of woodtokens and according to varying levels of preservation or needs. 
There are several drawbacks that can be identified in the terra0 model. To begin with, like Regen Network, it focuses on reconfiguring market forces by monetizing certain elements of the natural ecosystem. Furthermore, unless the trees are able to design and implement the rules of the smart contracts themselves, it is still humans that have principal agency on them. On a broader level, the very idea of forests gaining economic agency is somewhat trivial. In fact, much of the struggle in ecological movements seems to be on the opposite direction, that is, alleviating natural ecosystems from market functions, let alone enabling them to mimic humans and participate under similar terms. 
But still, terra0 remains an interesting experiment that attempts to enable different technological opportunities for governance of the commons. It builds on a potential combination of remote sensing, machine learning, and distributed ledger technologies to develop tools that may facilitate diverse outcomes in the collective management of natural ecosystems and resources, informed by the interaction of meshes of DAOs, which may deploy certain collective rules and norms. 
Ostrom Contracts: commons governance for the evolution of smart contracts
Ostrom Contracts build on a promising convergence of smart contract design with the Elinor Ostrom’s principles for successful governance of the commons. It offers a useful trajectory for the development of blockchain technology to enable and support self-governance and sustainability. 
The idea of Ostrom Contracts is inspired by the work of Elinor Ostrom (1990) on governing the commons. It is about AI-powered smart contracts coupled with intelligent environmental monitoring, informed by Ostrom’s design principles15 for successful commons. It builds upon a set of, arguably, untapped opportunities of smart contracts, which can offer accessible tools to engineer economic incentives in a cheap and scalable manner, and thus democratize the design of governance mechanisms. 
More specifically, Ostrom Contracts envisions the possibility of smart contracts to allow the treatment of economic functions in the fashion of software. This means prototyping, testing and iterating on “economies,” by embedding different motives and incentives into software code.16 This way, by compiling Ostrom’s principles into a software product, we provide insights on how to successfully enforce commons-based economic cooperation. 
Some possible interpretations of Ostrom’s principles in smart contract-related functions could be the following:17 
    • Principle 1: Clearly defined boundaries through token-based membership 
The agents that benefit from – and care for – shared resources must be clearly defined, and so must the boundaries of the resources themselves. Digital membership can help determine clear group boundaries and can be implemented by simply owning a token. Membership models motivate people to cooperate with each other by increasing trust and reducing the risk of being exploited, especially when they can always opt out by selling or transferring their token(s). In this sense, incentives to stay in the group are linked to access rights to either natural common resources and/or valuable group benefits (e.g., a shared and easy-to-access marketplace, more decision power, additional income). 
    • Principles 2 & 3: Blockchain governance for collective decision-making with local conditions at check 
Successful commons-based governance require the restriction of the rules and norms in terms of time, place, technology, and/or quantity of resource units, based on local biophysical conditions, including natural resources, labor, material, and/or money. Moreover, the majority of the individuals affected by the operational rules can participate in modifying and enforcing them. Smart contracts enable fast decision making with low overhead. Members of the group can interactively propose guidelines and actions and vote on all proposals, thus determining their own rules and adapting them in a quick manner. Blockchain governance can allow the development of novel decision making methods, which is based on predefined rules. These are informed by local and global concerns. 
    • Principle 4: Intelligent machine monitoring & learning
In self-governed systems, monitoring on the conditions of the shared resources and the behavior of individuals is implemented either by the members of the group themselves and/or by authorities accountable to them. However, in large natural ecosystems, like the Amazon rainforests or the vast landscape of the African Sahel region, it is almost impossible for a group of humans to constantly monitor such a large amount of territory. Scalable automation can offer great possibilities to effectively monitor larger commons, while maintaining trust through collective institutions and accountability to the members of the community. A number of research projects in wildlife monitoring, patrol planning and prediction, such as GainForest18 and The Great Elephant Census,19 already offer promising empirical evidence on the feasibility of such models. 
    • Principles 5 & 6: Graduated sanctions and easy-to-enforce conflict-resolution mechanisms through increasing stakes and smart-contract judge 
Self-governed groups often foresee graduated sanctions for violators of the operational rules to prevent repeated rule breaking. These sanctions depend on the seriousness and context of the offense and are assessed by other peers and/or officials accountable to these peers. Low-cost platforms for rapid conflict resolution provide efficiency and resilience. In case of a smart contract, if a rule violation is detected a self-enforcing function can be invoked, which may, for instance, subtract a fee from a deposit of a certain agent. Similarly, different levels of sanctions can be decided upon either through voting or automatically. 
For more complicated disputes, a smart contract can also play the role of the judge. Challenge/ response games can additionally be implemented, where one group of actors will be given the opportunity to submit evidence to falsify a certain set of facts, and if no convincing evidence is submitted over a period of time, then the truth can be assumed. 
    • Principles 7 & 8: Higher-level recognition and nested design by programmable censorship resistance and complexity 
For larger systems, the rights of commoners to devise their own rules of governance should not be challenged by external formal authorities. Similarly, the provision, monitoring, enforcement, conflict resolution, and governance should be organized in multiple nested layers to allow for resilience at greater scale. The decentralized and self-enforcing nature of blockchain-based smart contracts formally guarantees that decisions, made within this framework, are executed without censorship or control from higher-level authorities. Furthermore, smart contract architectures can be arbitrarily complex, allowing the development of intricate governance structures without limits in granularity. 
Ostrom contracts aim to encourage cooperation and self-governance. Smart contracts serve as a transaction and governance medium for people to self-organize and collectively decide on common matters. For this reason, there should be different levels of commitment to the deployment of smart contracts. Loosely coupled Ostrom contracts merely serve as media for self-organization, while the community remains the principal agent to enforce and implement their rules of governance and sanctions. Tightly coupled contracts can go one step further and automatically enforce execution. Automation can offer promising solutions by transferring the level of trust from the users to the system. However, automated systems also have many potentially dangerous implications as they are not immune from biases and adversarial attacks. 
The emergence of blockchain governance has inspired a broad array of experimentations to implement complex political and economic affairs through code. There are claims over the possibility to pilot and implement different systems and apply methods to evaluate, reiterate and potentially improve different variations of economic outcomes. For instance, P2P Models20 is another research project building on the potential of collaborative economy platforms harnessing ​blockchain technology. Building on the main outcomes of the P2P Value project,21 it envisions a​ similar combination of commons-based rules for a new generation of self-governed and more economically sustainable collaborative economy communities. Finally, Artificial Intelligence, forms of which are already deployed in many of our daily applications, can also be implemented to augment smart contracts. Such iterations of the development of these emerging technologies entail many promises in providing better information on potential alignment of human self-interest with common good. 


